<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8' ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<ui:composition xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
                xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets"
                xmlns:h="http://java.sun.com/jsf/html"
                xmlns:f="http://java.sun.com/jsf/core"
                xmlns:p="http://primefaces.org/ui"
                template="/template/_template_doc.xhtml">
    <ui:define name="content">
        <h:panelGrid style="padding: 30px 50px 20px 40px; font-family: Arial, Helvetica, Geneva; width: 96%">
            <h2>Publications</h2>

            <ul style="line-height: 27px; font-size: 14px; ">
                <li>
                    Pang, Z., Xu, L., Viau, C., Lu, Y., Salavati, R., Basu, N., and Xia, J.  (2024) 
                    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48009-6" target="_blank">MetaboAnalystR 4.0: a unified LC-MS workflow for global metabolomics</a> 
                    <u>Nature Communications</u> (doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-48009-6)
                </li>

                <li>
                    Pang, Z., Lu, Y., Zhou, G., Hui, F., Xu, L., Viau, C., Spigelman, A., MacDonald, P., Wishart, D., Li, S., and Xia, J. (2024) 
                    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkae253" target="_blank">MetaboAnalyst 6.0: towards a unified platform for metabolomics data processing, analysis and interpretation</a> 
                    <u>Nucleic Acids Research</u> (doi: 10.1093/nar/gkae253)
                </li>
                <li>
                    Ewald J., Zhou, G., Lu, Y., Kolic, J., Ellis, C.,  Johnson, J.D., Macdonald P.E. and Xia, J. (2024)  
                    <a href="https://www.nature.com/articles/s41596-023-00950-4" target="_blank">Web-based multi-omics integration using the Analyst software suite</a>
                    Nature Protocols (doi: 10.1038/s41596-023-00950-4)
                </li>
                <li>
                    Lu, Y., Pang, Z., and Xia, J. (2023) 
                    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbac553"  target="_blank">Comprehensive investigation of pathway enrichment methods for functional interpretation of LC-MS global metabolomics data</a>
                    Briefings In Bioinformatics (doi: 10.1093/bib/bbac553)
                </li>
                <li>
                    Pang, Z., Zhou, G., Ewald, J., Chang, L., Hacariz, O., Basu, N., and Xia, J. (2022) 
                    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-022-00710-w"  target="_blank">Using MetaboAnalyst 5.0 for LC-HRMS spectra processing, multi-omics integration and covariate adjustment of global metabolomics data</a>
                    Nature Protocols (doi: 10.1038/s41596-022-00710-w)
                </li>
                <li>
                    Pang, Z., Chong, J., Zhou, G., Morais D., Chang, L., Barrette, M., Gauthier, C., Jacques, PE., Li, S., and Xia, J. (2021) 
                    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab382" target="_blank">MetaboAnalyst 5.0: narrowing the gap between raw spectra and functional insights</a>
                    Nucl. Acids Res. (doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab382)
                </li>
                <li>
                    Pang, Z., Zhou, G., Chong, J. and Xia, J. (2021) 
                    <a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo11010044" target="_blank">
                        Comprehensive Meta-Analysis of COVID-19 Global Metabolomics Datasets </a>
                    Metabolites 11(1), 44 (<i style="color: grey">Functional meta-analysis</i>)
                </li>
                <li>
                    Pang, Z., Chong, J., Li, S. and Xia, J. (2020) 
                    <a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo10050186" target="_blank">
                        MetaboAnalystR 3.0: Toward an Optimized Workflow for Global Metabolomics.</a>
                    Metabolites 10(5) 186 (<i style="color: grey">R code underlying MetaboAnalyst web server</i>)
                </li>
                <li>
                    Chong, J., Wishart, D.S. and Xia, J. (2019) 
                    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/cpbi.86" target='_blank'>
                        Using MetaboAnalyst 4.0 for Comprehensive and Integrative Metabolomics Data Analysis</a>. 
                    Current Protocols in Bioinformatics 68, e86 (<i style="color: grey">128 pages</i>)
                </li>  
                <li>
                    Chong, J., Yamamoto M. and Xia, J. (2019) 
                    <a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo9030057" target='_blank'>
                        MetaboAnalystR 2.0: From Raw Spectra to Biological Insights</a>. 
                    Metabolites, 9(3), 57. (<i style="color: grey">R code underlying MetaboAnalyst web server</i>)
                </li>                        
                <li>
                    Chong, J. and Xia, J. (2018) 
                    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty528" target='_blank'>
                        MetaboAnalystR: an R package for flexible and reproducible analysis of metabolomics data</a>. 
                    Bioinformatics, 27 4313–4314. (<i style="color: grey">R code underlying MetaboAnalyst web server</i>)
                </li>
                <li>
                    Chong, J., Soufan, O., Li, C., Caraus, I., Li, S., Bourque, G., Wishart, D.S. and Xia, J. (2018) 
                    <a href="http://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky310" target='_blank'>
                        MetaboAnalyst 4.0: towards more transparent and integrative metabolomics analysis</a>. Nucl. Acids Res. 46, W486-494.
                </li>
                <li>
                    Xia, J. and Wishart, D.S. (2016) 
                    <a href="http://doi.org/10.1002/cpbi.11" target='_blank'>
                        Using MetaboAnalyst 3.0 for Comprehensive Metabolomics Data Analysis</a>
                    Current Protocols in Bioinformatics, 55:14.10.1-14.10.91.
                </li>
                <li>
                    Xia, J., Sinelnikov, I., Han, B., and Wishart, D.S. (2015) 
                    <a href="http://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv380" target='_blank'>
                        MetaboAnalyst 3.0 - making metabolomics more meaningful </a>. 
                    Nucl. Acids Res. 43, W251-257.
                </li>
                <li>
                    Xia, J., Broadhurst, D., Wilson, M. and Wishart, D. (2013) 
                    <a href="http://doi.org/10.1007/s11306-012-0482-9" target='_blank'>
                        Translational biomarker discovery in clinical metabolomics: an introductory tutorial</a>. Metabolomics, 9, 280-299.
                    (<i style="color: grey">biomarker analysis</i>)
                </li>
                <li>
                    Xia, J., Mandal, R., Sinelnikov, I., Broadhurst, D., and Wishart, D.S. (2012) 
                    <a href="http://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks374" target='_blank'>
                        MetaboAnalyst 2.0 - a comprehensive server for metabolomic data analysis </a>. 
                    Nucl. Acids Res. 40, W127-133.
                </li>                        
                <li>
                    Xia, J., Sinelnikov, I., and Wishart, D.S. (2011)
                    <a href="http://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btr392" target='_blank'>
                        MetATT - a web-based metabolomic tool for analyzing time-series and two-factor data sets</a>. Bioinformatics, 27, 2455-2456
                    (<i style="color: grey">time-series and two-factor analysis</i>)
                </li>
                <li>
                    Xia, J. and Wishart, D.S. (2011) 
                    <a href="http://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2011.319" target='_blank'>
                        Web-based inference of biological patterns, functions and pathways from metabolomic data using MetaboAnalyst</a>
                    Nature Protocols 6 (6), 743-760.
                </li>
                <li>
                    Xia, J. and Wishart, D.S. (2011) 
                    <a href="http://doi.org/10.1002/0471250953.bi1410s34" target='_blank'>
                        Metabolomic data processing, analysis, and interpretation using MetaboAnalyst</a>
                    Current Protocols in Bioinformatics, 14.10.1-14.10.48.
                </li>
                <li>
                    Xia, J. and Wishart, D.S. (2010)
                    <a href="http://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq418" target='_blank'>
                        MetPA: a web-based metabolomics tool for pathway analysis and visualization</a>. Bioinformatics, 26, 2342-2344
                    (<i style="color: grey">metabolic pathway analysis</i>)
                </li>
                <li>
                    Xia, J. and Wishart, D.S. (2010) 
                    <a href="http://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkq329" target='_blank'>
                        MSEA: a web-based tool to identify biologically meaningful patterns in quantitative metabolomic data</a>. Nucleic Acids Research, 38, W71-77
                    (<i style="color: grey">metabolite set enrichment analysis</i>)
                </li>
                <li>
                    Xia, J., Psychogios, N., Young, N. and Wishart, D.S. (2009) 
                    <a href="http://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkp356"  target='_blank'>
                        MetaboAnalyst: a web server for metabolomic data analysis and interpretation</a>. 
                    Nucl. Acids Res. 37, W652-660. 
                </li>
            </ul>
        </h:panelGrid>
    </ui:define>
</ui:composition>
